# Single Neurons Detect Spatiotemporal Activity Transitions through STP and EI imbalance

## Code for simulations and figure generation for Figure 8.

Copyright (C) 2025 Aditya Asopa and Upinder S. Bhalla, 
National Centre for Biological Sciences,
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bangalore, India.

All code in this project is licensed under GPL 3.0

There is a preliminary version of this paper out on bioRxiv:

"Short-term plasticity of EI balance at single neurons can detect pattern transitions"

Aditya Asopa and Upinder S. Bhalla

bioRxiv 2024.10.30.621034; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.30.621034

## About
This is the code and data repository for figure 8.

## Dependencies

All the code here uses **Python** version 3.10.

All the simulation code uses **MOOSE** version 4.1.0 Jhangri.

The model optimization code also depends on  **HOSS** and **FindSim** .

Some of the MOOSE graphics depends on the 3-D rendering package **vpython**.

[MOOSE](https://github.com/BhallaLab/moose-core) is the Multiscale Object 
Oriented
Simulation environment. It is good for running ODE-based signaling models
defined in the standard SBML, as well as multiscale models combining electrical
and chemical signaling. The current project depends on its multiscale 
capabilities.

[FindSim](https://github.com/BhallaLab/FindSim) is the Framework for Integrating
Neuronal Data and Signaling Models. 

[HOSS](https://github.com/BhallaLab/HOSS) HOSS provides a set of methods for performing hierarchical optimization of signaling and other models.


## CONTENTS

This directory contains several subdirectories, each responsible for one or
more panels in the final Figure 8.

Each panel is constructed from an hdf5 file generated by the script
`genFig8_surpise.py` with appropriate arguments, as listed below. Some of
`genFig8_surpise.py` scripts will generate a whole series of outputs.

Most of the generated hdf5 files are around 40MB in size, hence are not
included in this github repository.
Below I list the panel, the directory, and the command used to run it along
with typical run times on a 128-core 7763 AMD server.
Note that the commands used tcsh. You'll need to modify the logfile 
redirection if you prefer bash.

	- Panel A, B, C, D, E:	`SURP38_fixed`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 > & ! log38b.txt &`
		This takes about 2 hours.

	- Panel F: `SURP40_deviant`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_dev > & ! log40b.txt &`

	- Panel G: `SURP41_GAP`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_gap > & ! log41b.txt &`

	- Panel H, I, J: `SURP48_noSTP_fixed`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 > & ! log48.txt &`

	- Panel K: `SURP45_noGABA`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 0 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 > & ! log45_b.txt &`

	- panel L: `SURP43_uniform_pattern`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_unif > & ! log43b.txt &`

	- panel M: `SURP44_rand_pattern`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_rand > & ! log44b.txt &`

	- panel N: `SURP38_Freq_Sweep`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py -d > & ! lfreq.txt &`

	- panel O: This schematic is generated from within the plotFig8.py.

	- panel P: `SURP46_theta_pat`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_theta_pat > & ! log46b.txt &`

	- panel Q: `SURP47_theta_uniform`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 24 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o fixwt_theta_unif > & ! log47b.txt &`

	- Panel R and S: `SURP50_theta_gamma_precess`
		`python genFig8_surprise.py --spiking --wtGlu 5 --wtGABA 16.67 --numProcess 8 --numRepeats 50 --seedStochastic 9999 -o prec > & ! log50.txt &`
		This takes about 1 hour.

